# How to use DIALS 
## Before continuing with this tutorial, make sure DIALS is properly installed (into a python 3.10 environment).
- [DIALS](https://dials.github.io/index.html) (Diffraction Integration for Advanced Light Sources) is diffraction software developed to analyse x-ray diffraction data. DIALS is a very useful tool run via the command line and is heavily documented. 
- DIALS comes with its own GUI which is installed intrinsically when DIALS is installed. 

Note:
- Make an output folder called **dialsX** where X is some kind of identifier for the dataset you are using. This folder should be in the same directory as the images. 
- There should be a folder called **xds_** which is the folder containing the two output files from xds (XPARM.XDS and XDS.INP) in the same place. 
- In the terminal, navigate to this ouput folder. Then:
    - check whether DIALS is properly installed by running:
```
dials.version
```
- This should print the current version. 

1. Import the folder containing the cbf images (in pre_processed) using:
```
dials.import_xds ../xds_
```
- This should output **xds_models.expt**

2. Have a look at the unprocessed data (good idea to get an idea of what/ where hot pixels are):
```
dials.show xds_models.expt
dials.image_viewer xds_models.expt 
```
3. See how the data looks in reciprocal space without processing by using:
```
dials.reciprocal_space_viewer xds_models.expt
```
- If the reciprocal space appears very crowded and you cannot make out the expected reciprocal space lattice, then pay special attention to the space group determination in step 5. 
4. For peak detection, either before or after making a mask, use:
```
dials.find_spots xds_models.expt 
```
which will output the strong reflections (**strong.refl**)

5. To assign a Miller index to every found spot, use the index function:
```
dials.index xds_models.expt strong.refl 
```
- this will output a table providing unit cell parameters, show the percentage of indexed peaks and other useful information. 
- To be rigorous, make sure that the output here provides similar parameters to xds. 
- output files are: indexed.expt and indexed.refl 
- If the space group provided after indexing is still P1, then follow the sub steps below. If the space group is in accordance with your crystal, move on to refinement in step 6. 
- For the steps below (5b-f) it is important that you are familiar with the concept of a space group and the seven crystal systems.

5b. To determine appropriate space group options refine the bravais lattice settings:
```
dials.refine_bravais_settings indexed.expt indexed.refl 
```
- this will output a table of chiral space groups which correspond to bravais lattice space groups. Choose your chosen bravais setting based on the unit cell and the expected space group. 

5c. Then reindex your data again according to your chosen space group and solution:
```
dials.reindex bravais_setting_22.expt space_group=P422
```
- where you can replace P422 with whichever space group you have. 
- this will output reindexed.expt and reindexed.refl

5d. Now index your reindexed data with the strong reflections found in step 5. 
```
dials.index reindexed.expt strong.refl
```
-this will output indexed.expt and indexed.refl 

5e. Now that you have a proper indexing you can refine the bravais settings again (with different solutions) if needed:
```
dials.refine_bravais_settings indexed.expt indexed.refl
```
5f. Then refine again (if needed) If you do this step, skip step 6:
```
dials.refine indexed.expt indexed.refl 
```
6. If needed, DIALS has a refine function which can improve spot predictions, and can be ran as:
```
dials.refine indexed.expt indexed.refl 
```
 
7. An excellent feature of DIALS is the report html it can produce. This report contains many charts and summarises information from the previous steps.
```
dials.report refined.expt refined.refl
```

### If DIALS has indexed your data with the wrong space group but you have an expected number of spots (no need for this if you followed 5b-f:
1. Be aware which space group you are expecting.
2. Refine your Bravais Settings:
```
dials.refine_bravais_settings indexed.expt indexed.refl 
```
- this will output a table with multiple Bravais settings. 
- In this table, the solutions with the smallest value of metric fit will be preceded by * to show which solutions the algorithm recommends. 
- It is significant to familiarise yourself with the presented space group options so that you can make your decision. 
- the last column of the table contains the change of basis operations; how to go from the P1 to your chosen space group. 

3. Use the following function to apply your change of basis operation:
```
dials.reindex indexed.refl change_of_basis_op= CB_OP
```
- where CB_OP should be substituted by the change of basis operation for your chosen space group. 
- this will output a reindexed.refl

4. from here you can continue processing as shown above (start with refining)

### Observe refined.expt:
- Before importing refined.expt in mdx2, it is important to open the file and check that **exposure time** is greater than 0.
- Ensuring this now is significant to prevent an infinity error when integrating
-   If you are processing the full 360 degrees of your data there will be approximately 3600 different exposure times. If these are all set to zero, then run a simple for loop such that:
```
exposure_time= [A]
print(len(exposure_time))
for i in range (len(exposure_time)):
    print('0.X,')
```
- where A is the list of 0.0 exposure times from refined.expt
- where X is any non zero integer. The exposure time should have been recorded in your experimental parameters (for the practice dataset uploaded, the expoure time is 0.25).
- then replace the exposure time list from refined.expt with the outputted list from python.

Note that DIALS can perform many more tasks and is not restricted to these commands. 
